---
title: Executive Summary
author: Sam Thorold
documentclass: article
bibliography: ./references.bib
link-citations: true
papersize: a4
geometry: margin=1in
fontsize: 12pt
language: en-US
...

1. Do $HML_m$, $RMW_G$ and $WML$ improve sharpe ratio?
    * Spread factors
    * Long components (Implications for industry)
2. Do the best intuitive factors outperform PCA out-of-sample (define; best, outperform and out-of-sample)
    * Guard against overfitting
    * Outperform: predict further into the future, smaller residuals out of sample, different country
3. Do the different specifications of best factors allow us to say any more about the "lethal" combination?
    * Particularly loadings on different profitability factors
    * Investment dies with cash and momentum so different specification of investment may help here


Recent tests of factor models (See @barillas2016alpha and @fama2016choosing) have moved away from the traditional regressions using "anomalous" porfolios.
Instead, analysis has focused on the maximum sharpe ratio a set of factors can produce.
Combining new results with intuition from previous regression-based analyses (See @fama1993common and @fama2015five), a five factor model comprised of; market, size, value, profitibility and investment emerged.
The F-statistic of @gibbons1989test rejects the null hypothesis that the intercepts from common regressions are jointly zero.
All models are wrong but some are useful.

@fama2016choosing reveals that the small component portfolios of the traditional spread factors also produce high squared sharpe ratios.
This follows from reasoning in @fama1996multifactor that near MMV portfolios must be comprised of near MMV portfolios.
Loadings on these factors can take extreme short positions that are perhaps impractical for real trading.
Ease of implementation motivates using factors known to derive their returns from the long side of their spread portfolios rather than from underporformance of the short side.
For example, the gross profitability factor of @novy2013other derives its return from the robust side of the spread while the defensive factor of @frazzini2014betting derives its value from the underperformance of the high volatility side of the spread.
This investigation has implications for industry because many investors have short-selling restrictions.

While tests of the traditional factor models have moved on, the factors themselves have changed little.
The size and fundamental value factors have not changed since their introduction in @fama1993common.
The tendancy for stocks with relatively high returns over the past year to outperform those with relatively low returns over the same period is not a new phenomenon (See @jegadeesh1993returns).
Despite the prevalence of momentum strategies in the literature and in industry, the momentum anomaly remains a problem for factor models.
The relationship between fundamental value and momentum has been highlighted in @asness2013devil.
This relationship and alternative specification for fundamental value motivate including momentum in the model.
Momentum is poorly explained by other factors and so it is logical it contains information not in other factors.
This will raise the sharpe ratio of a set of factors including momentum.

Conscious of "fishing" for factors (See @harvey2016and) and the statistical properties of relationships between factors (@fama2015incremental discusses the effects on regression slopes of negatively correlated factors), it is useful to conduct out of sample tests.
One of the best out of sample tests is to use returns from another country.
Not only does this provide a totally different universe of stocks but some countries have oddities specific to that geography (See @fama2017international for a discussion of Japan).
One should also be conscious of over-fitting.
If we add enough factors eventually we will have a factor for each stock and we will explain returns perfectly.
Principal component analysis can guide us when choosing a parsimonious model.
@kozak2017interpreting demonstrates how principal component analysis can replicate closely the size and fundamental value factors by fitting the first two principal components to returns.
This provides an opportunity to confirm our model is somewhat parmsimonious by comparing to the number of components.
We can also confirm our factors derived from intuition outperform those derived from statistics in principal component analysis.

The five factor model of @fama2015five struggles to explain the returns on portfolios whose returns behave like those of small, unprofitable firms which invest aggressively.
This is the so-called "lethal" combination of negative profitability and investment loadings that many anomalies share (See @fama2016dissecting).
Perhaps different portfolios with similarly high sharpe ratios can shed light on why this is the case.
For example, competing "successful" models may have different loadings on their respective profitability and investment factors.
Furthermore, the investment factor in $R_M$, $SMB$, $HML_m$, $RMW_C$, $CMA$ and $WML$ adds very little to the sharpe ratio.
Investment is typically defined in the manner of @fama2015five as the percentage change in assets.
This is not a particularly clean measure of investment.
Perhaps a more intuitive measure of investment involves the change in PPE plus depreciation expense for the period.
Even a non-result here would shed light on the role of the investment factor in explaining returns on small, unprofitable but somehow aggressively investing firms.

